---
title: "How Democrats Failed Black Americans and Helped Create Trumpism"
slug: enough-already
description: "Black Americans aren't just another People of Color"
date: 2020-06-26 10:51:13
author: Steve Shupe
tags:
    - Democrats
    - Trump
    - Racism
    - Identity Politics
    - Slavery
    - Jim Crow
cover: https://www.washingtonpost.com/resizer/QLSt3S3irb8o9XsflqHByzbSuhM=/1800x0/filters:quality(100)/arc-anglerfish-washpost-prod-washpost/public/HSPGRJFCHEI6VPQGV5KRJ3QDQU.jpg
fullscreen: false
---

The [death of George Floyd](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/29/us/minneapolis-police-george-floyd.html), a black resident of Minneapolis, at the hands of white officers of the Minneapolis Police, has raised America's failure to address the impacts on black Americans of 400-plus years of slavery, Jim Crow, and _de jure_ and _de facto_ segregation to the front of our national consciousness yet again.

I came of age shortly after the civil rights movement of the 1960s. From a nation at least trying to recognize its history of degradation of black Americans and to take steps to remedy the dark impacts of that history, how did we get to where we are now -- a nation where the President subtly encourages white supremacists, a nation where the smallest attempts to be racially sensitive and courteous are derided as "political correctness", a nation where divisive memes and angry screeds are encouraged and commonplace?

To many on the left, the answer is simple: White racism toward blacks never went away, and after 50 years of being stoked by the right, it has become mainstream again.

Without denying the existence of racism or the right's nourishment of it, this explanation is incomplete. For many years, the Democratic Party was in control of the White House and the Congress, yet conditions on the ground for most black Americans did not advance much.

This piece argues that the Democratic Party bears its share of responsibility for the failure of our nation to address the problems facing black Americans, and for creating the racial and economic divisions present in our society today.

The passage of the landmark Civil Rights Act in 1964 was a long-overdue step to remedy two centuries of legally-sanctioned oppression of black Americans. Few remember that the bill passed with overwhelming Republican support: In the House, 136 Republicans voted in favor, with 35 opposed, as compared to a vote of 153 for and 91 against by Democrats. The Senate vote was similar: Republicans in favor 27-6, Democrats in favor 46-21.

The passage of the Civil Rights Act triggered a slow but large party realignment, especially in the South. President Johnson reportedly said to an aide after signing the Act that Democrats "have lost the South for a generation.” Johnson was prescient; voters who were the heart of Democratic coalition from 1935 to 1965 -- white unionized middle-class industrial-workers -- began to leave the party and join the Republicans.

Over the next forty years, the Democratic party tried to make up for this loss by appealing to other constituencies. Unfortunately, the way Democrats went about this pushed the white working class even further way from the Democrats, and deepened racial and economic divisions in the country, and made it more difficult to improve conditions for most black Americans.

A key part of the Democrat's strategy was to appeal to any and all non-white, non-European racial groups, creating a coalition of "People of Color." This was, in my view, both a strategic and moral mistake.

It was a moral mistake because the history of black people in the United States is not comparable to that of any other racial group (except Native Americans, another special case deserving of special treatment). For over four hundred years, blacks were captured, subjugated, and sold into slavery, brought to America involuntarily, treated as property, as less-than-human chattel, forced to engage in hard physical labor, abused and mistreated. _The government of the United States and many of its constituent states explicitly supported this evil._ Slavery was _allowed and protected under our laws._

While slavery was abolished after the civil war, the efforts of the Reconstruction to incorporate blacks into the American polity were inadequate and temporary, and our laws -- especially those in the Southern states -- continued to treat blacks as inferior and allowed explicit, legally-sanctioned discrimination against black Americans to continue. These ["Jim Crow"](https://www.ferris.edu/jimcrow/what.htm#:~:text=Jim%20Crow%20was%20the%20name,was%20a%20way%20of%20life.) laws, along with its accompanying social caste system, continued in place for a full century after the abolition of slavery.

Black Americans have suffered four hundred years of mistreatment and abuse. The United States not only permitted those scurrilous horrors, _it legally sanctioned them._ No other racial or ethnic group experienced anything similar.

Yet by lumping black Americans into a "People of Color" bucket in order to expand its electoral base, the Democratic Party ignored the fact that the moral debt America owes to blacks is unique, both in kind and scale, unlike any owed to other racial or ethnic groups. It treats, for example, the situation of a El Salvadoran who _voluntarily chooses_ for economic reasons to enter the U.S. without following our immigration laws -- and who has never been subjected to _legal, state-sanctioned_ discrimination due to his or her race -- the same as the situation of the descendent of black Africans who were captured and involuntarily brought to America, where for 400 years _our laws_ allowed his racial group to be exploited as slaves, and denied the rights and opportunities given to other citizens even after emancipation.

America's 400-year history of black oppression and domination has also ingrained in the non-black population conscious or unconscious racist views towards black Americans that simply aren't as strong as those faced by other racial groups. It's unlikely that a white American (or an Asian American) would move to the other side of the a dark street upon seeing two Filipino men. But two black men, well, that's another story entirely. The ongoing discrimination and mistrust faced by black Americans is on a different level than that of any other group.

The Democratic Party's adoption of an "identity" politics that includes every ethnic and racial group _other than European whites_ also worsened racial divisions. Policies such as "affirmative action", which may have had some moral justification (and much wider political support) if applied only to black Americans (and Native Americans), were seen by many white Americans as racist, a simple giveaway of political spoils by Democrats to every racial group other than European whites. This gave rise to an entirely rational resentment on the part of white Americans: I and my children are being discriminated against by the government because of the color of our skin.

Thus rather than trying to create a situation in which white Americans might be convinced to support mitigative actions by the government to improve the situation of black Americans due to their unique situation, the Democrats created a us-versus-them schism between white European Americans and every other racial group. Democrats seemed to abandoned the very idea of "Americans" -- one people united, _E Pluribus Unum_. There weren't Americans anymore, there were only African-Americans, Asian-Americans, Mexican-Americans, Latino-Americans, Pacific Islanders, Vietnamese-Americans, Arab-Americans, and so forth on one side, and white European-Americans on the other.

This was bound to further alienate many European-Americans from the Democratic Party and increase the appeal of right-wing demagogues such as Trump. If the principle that individuals should be judged [not by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character](https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/martin_luther_king_jr_115056) was being abandoned, if each ethnic and racial group was entitled to press for its own specific advantages and its own political spoils, well, then what about European whites? Shouldn't they be allowed to push for a policies that further their own interests at the expense of the interests of other racial groups?

The Democratic Party failed black Americans in another way: While the Democratic Party sought to bring them into its electoral coalition, they were never properly included in the Democratic Party's intellectual and fundraising core (that is, into its "establishment"). Over time, this core became predominately white, well-educated, and increasingly affluent and urban, and its primary concerns frankly did not include remedying the condition of black Americans. More important issues to them included the environment and advancing the role of women and gays in society. These "core" Democrats saw nothing wrong with moving to safer urban or suburban areas with better schools (thus increasing segregation), and were more concerned with saving the Amazonian rainforest than helping black Americans overcome 400 years of maltreatment and fully integrate into American society.

At the same time, the importance of unions to the Democratic Party was declining; the party cared less and less about the economic concerns of the working-class. Part of this was because those representing the core of the party -- well-educated urban whites -- were no longer a part of the working class. Surely did not want _their_ children to be working class, and spent much of their time and resources ensuring that would not happen. Working class jobs should be filled by the less-educated and the less-able. If the pay for those jobs sunk to levels that no longer supported a middle-class lifestyle, well, that was appropriate given the workers lack of education and skills which, presumably, they could have obtained if they wanted. This dissociation of the Democratic core from the working class, and the weakening of workers' unions, also furthered the widening economic divide between the haves and the have-nots.

This lack of concern with working-class economic interests, when added to the Democratic Party's disdain for the cultural conservatism of the white working class (as evidenced by Barack Obama's ["they cling to guns or religion or antipathy to people who aren't like them"](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/apr/14/barackobama.uselections2008) remarks or Hillary Clinton's infamous ["basket of deplorables ... the racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamaphobic"](https://time.com/4486502/hillary-clinton-basket-of-deplorables-transcript/) remarks) created the fertile ground upon which Trump's poisonous garden of hatred, demagoguery, explicit racism, willful ignorance, disbelief of experts, and denial of scientific (and other) facts could sprout and spread. Trump is a vile, unstable, racist and narcissist who has worsened divisions in our country, but he did not create them alone.

If the Democratic Party is serious about improving the condition of black Americans, it needs to recognize that the history of black Americans in this country, and the problems they face as a result of that history, are simply not the same as other racial groups. While other "People of Color" are subject to discrimination (as were earlier European-American immigrant groups such as the Irish, Italians, Poles, etc.), the nature and level of discrimination against black Americans, and the social disfunctions created by 400 years of slavery and governmentally-enforced oppression, which continue to be transmitted generation-to-generation, are orders of magnitude greater than those faced by other racial and ethnic minority groups.

If the Democratic Party is serious about finally helping black Americans become equal participants in the life of our country, free from the lingering systematic discrimination resulting from slavery and Jim Crow, it will need to make that task Job One. It will need to prioritize the task above the issues favored by its affluent white core. This will anger and disappoint other members of the Democratic coalition, but it is the right thing to do. (The same is true of remedial actions to improve the conditions of Native Americans, who also faced longstanding government violence and oppression.)

As Americans, we owe it to ourselves and to our history to finally heal the injuries and depredations our federal and state governments and our people inflicted on black Americans for over 400 years. The Democrats' politically-motivated fiction that all non-white, non-European racial and ethnic groups have suffered the same kind of injury and depredations as black Americans has impeded and delayed the implementation of effective remedial justice for black Americans.
